---
layout: post
title: "Deno 1.0 and Why You Should Care"
category: blog
---

Today marks the [1.0 release](https://deno.land/v1) of Deno (pronounced DEE-NOH), just two short years since Ryan Dahl originally announced the project.

If you're active in the Javascript community you might have heard of the project, but for the benefit of those of you who haven't I'll quickly run through what Deno is and how it's different to Node.js.

## How It's the Same

Deno, like Node.js, is a Javascript runtime focused on an event-driven architecture and non-blocking IO. 

It aims to solve the same kinds of problems that Node.js is good at such as web services, system utilities and shell scripting.

## How It's Different

**A Commitment to Web Standards**

Deno embraces web standards and aims to be browser compatible where possible including ditching CommonJS modules for ES modules, unifying APIs around Promises and Typed Arrays and replacing `global` with a `window` object that includes all the web-compatible APIs that you would expect.

**A Focus on Security**

Deno preserves the sandboxed security model of V8 by requiring explicit permissions to access the disk and network. These permissions can be extremely granular which can make it easy to audit dependencies and run 3rd party code with confidence.

**Typescript Support Out of the Box**

Typescript has exploded in popularity within the Javascript community over the last few years. While dynamic typing is great for scripting, exploration and speed of development, people have begun to appreciate the benefits of static typing for larger systems with regards to enforcing constraints and easing maintenance. 

In Deno, Typescript is a first class citizen and can be used directly without any additional tooling.

**Simplified Package Management**

Deno discards `package.json`, `npm` and `node_modules` and instead opts for a simpler url based import system. This means that package management is decentralised by default and that urls contain versioning information. 

Dependencies are cached the first time they are downloaded and Deno provides facilities to manage version updates as well as vendoring dependencies for production environments.

**Built in Tooling**

Deno has committed to always ship as a single executable and includes a number of common tools typically handled by third party libraries. These include code formatting, testing and code bundling, but also utilities such as shell completions and installing a script as an executable.

**Rich Standard Library**

Deno focused on having a small core but an extensive [standard library](https://deno.land/std/) written in the same way you would write user code. The standard library is inspired by the Go standard library and provides a number of facilities that would normally require third party libraries such as Lodash or Underscore.

## What Deno Means for the Future

Node.js has built a rich ecosystem and isn't going anywhere soon. 

Deno is still a young project, and while some people have been [working hard](https://github.com/denolib/awesome-deno) to port various projects, it will still be some time until the ecosystem matures.

That being said Deno does feel like a simpler, modern alternative to Node.js and its focus on simplicity and batteries included philosophy will be a breath of fresh air to some.

If you're curious, with today's 1.0 release and a commitment to a stable API there has never been a better time to give Deno a [try](https://github.com/denoland/deno_install).
